{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red155\green0\blue211;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2510;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\lang9\f0\fs36 Physical therapists\cf0\fs22  \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
Physical therapists have different titles in different countries: in many countries they are called physiotherapists. Some countries have their own version of the word physical therapist, such as kinesiologist. They are all part of the same profession. \par
\par
Physical therapists provide services that develop, maintain and restore people\rquote s maximum movement and functional ability. They can help people at any stage of life, when movement and function are threatened by ageing, injury, diseases, disorders, conditions or environmental factors. \par
\par
Physical therapists help people maximise their quality of life, looking at physical, psychological, emotional and social wellbeing. They work in the health spheres of promotion, prevention, treatment/intervention, habilitation and rehabilitation. \par
\par
Physical therapists are qualified and professionally required to: \par
\par
undertake a comprehensive examination/assessment of the patient/client or needs of a client group\par
evaluate the findings from the examination/assessment to make clinical judgments regarding patients/clients\par
formulate a diagnosis, prognosis and plan\par
provide consultation within their expertise and determine when patients/clients need to be referred to another healthcare professional\par
implement a physical therapist intervention/treatment programme\par
determine the outcomes of any interventions/treatments\par
make recommendations for self-management.\par
\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\fs36 Acupuncture\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\fs22 Acupuncture is a form of treatment that involves inserting very thin needles through a person's skin at specific points on the body, to various depths.\par
\par
Research suggests that it can help relieve pain, and it is used for a wide range of other complaints.\par
\par
However, according to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), there is limited evidence for its effectiveness in areas other than pain.\par
\par
How acupuncture works scientifically remains unclear. Some people claim it works by balancing vital energy, while others believe it has a neurological effect.\par
\par
Acupuncture remains controversial among Western medical doctors and scientists.\par
\par
What is Acupuncture?\par
An acupuncurist will insert needles into a person's body with the aim of balancing their energy.\par
\par
This, it is claimed, can help boost wellbeing and may cure some illnesses.\par
\par
Conditions it is used for include different kinds of pain, such as headaches, blood pressure problems, and whooping cough, among others.\par
\par
How does it work?\par
Traditional Chinese medicine explains that health is the result of a harmonious balance of the complementary extremes of "yin" and "yang" of the life force known as "qi," pronounced "chi." Illness is said to be the consequence of an imbalance of the forces.\par
\par
Qi is said to flow through meridians, or pathways, in the human body. These meridiens and energy flows are accessible through 350 acupuncture points in the body.\par
\par
Inserting needles into these points with appropriate combinations is said to bring the energy flow back into proper balance.\par
\par
There is no scientific proof that the meridians or acupuncture points exist, and it is hard to prove that they either do or do not, but numerous studies suggest that acupuncture works for some conditions.\par
\par
Some experts have used neuroscience to explain acupuncture. Acupuncture points are seen as places where nerves, muscles, and connective tissue can be stimulated. The stimulation increases blood flow, while at the same time triggering the activity of the body's natural painkillers.\par
\par
It is difficult to set up investigations using proper scientific controls, because of the invasive nature of acupuncture. In a clinical study, a control group would have to undergo sham treatment, or a placebo, for results to be compared with those of genuine acupuncture.\par
\par
Some studies have concluded that acupuncture offers similar benefits to a patient as a placebo, but others have indicated that there are some real benefits.\par
\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\fs36 Orthopedic Bracing\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\fs22 Orthopedic braces are medical devices designed to address musculoskeletal issues; they are used to properly align, correct the position, support, stabilize, and protect certain parts of the body (particularly the muscles, joints, and bones) as they heal from injury or trauma. These medical devices are often prescribed for the patient to wear during the process of recovery and rehabilitation. \par
\par
Many specialized healthcare fields use orthopaedic braces, including those concerned with rehabilitating and preventing injuries, post-operative care, osteoarthritic care, and more. A qualified medical professional can determine what type of orthopaedic brace is ideal for the patient, as well as the fit, type of support, function, and level of stability or protection. \par
\par
Orthopaedic devices fall under the medical specialty of orthotics, a field that involves the design, manufacture, and application of orthopaedic braces and other similar devices that are used outside the patient\rquote s body to modify or improve the function and structure of the affected muscles and bones. \par
\par
It is important to note, however, that orthopaedic braces should not be worn without the advice or recommendation of a doctor and an orthotist, who is a clinician responsible for prescribing, manufacturing, managing, and monitoring orthopaedic braces and other orthoses. \par
\par
Orthopaedic braces can be used in various ways. They can be prescribed to stop limbs, specific segments of the body, or joints from moving for a pre-determined period. This can be very important in facilitating proper recovery and positioning as the affected body part heals. Braces are often recommended for restricting and assisting general movement, removing weight from healing or injured joints and muscles, and correcting the shape and function to reduce pain and facilitate improved mobility. Patients who have suffered from fractures or broken bones can also be prescribed orthopaedic braces to aid in musculoskeletal rehabilitation.\par
\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\fs36 Sports Injury\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\fs22 Sports injuries refer to the kinds of injury that occur during sports or exercise. While it is possible to injure any part of the body when playing sports, the term sports injuries is commonly used to refer to injuries of the musculoskeletal system. Some of the most common sports injuries include:\par
\par
Sprains \emdash  tears to the ligaments that join the ends of bones together. The ankles, knees, and wrists are commonly affected by sprains.\par
Strains \emdash  pulls or tears of muscles or tendons (the tissues that attach the muscles to the bones)\par
"Shin splints"\emdash pain along the outside front of the lower leg, commonly seen in runners\par
Achilles tendonitis or rupture of the Achilles tendon \emdash  These injuries involve the large band of tissue that connects the calf muscles to the heel\par
Fractures of the bones\par
Dislocation of joints\par
Acute injuries usually occur suddenly while participating in sports or exercise. They may result in sudden and severe pain, the inability to bear weight on a limb, or inability to move the affected part of the body. Chronic injuries usually result from overuse of one area of the body over a period of time. Symptoms of chronic injuries include soreness, dull aching pain, and pain during participation in physical activity. \par
What happens to the tissues after an acute injury? \par
\par
When a runner "pulls a groin" or a tennis player "strains a tendon," the soft tissues in the area of pain are injured. Immediately after the injury, there are disrupted fibers of the affected muscle, tendon, and/or ligament. Additionally, the tiny blood vessels (capillaries) that normally supply blood and oxygen to these tissues are broken. The broken capillaries then leak varying amounts of blood and serum into the adjacent tissues. Therefore, soon after a soft tissue injury, localized swelling occurs. The injured tissues become painful and tender, both directly from the trauma to them and indirectly from the subsequent swelling. This leads to the stiffness, pain, and tenderness that so often accompany the inflammation of tendinitis, bursitis, as well as strain and sprain injuries. It should also be noted that even a bone injury (such as a fracture) is typically accompanied by injury to the nearby soft tissues.\par
\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\fs36 Rehabilitation\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\fs22 Walking your dog in a park. Dashing down a basketball court. Mowing your lawn. We usually don\rquote t think about the great gift we have to move, bend, lift, throw or push without limitation. But an injury or illness can take away those abilities and suddenly everyday activities become extraordinary tasks.\par
\par
Physical rehabilitation is the process of restoring and regaining physical strength and function. Physical rehabilitation can be used to help treat a simple ankle sprain or to help a stroke survivor walk, talk and eat again.\par
\par
\ldblquote Physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians, nurses and physical, occupational, speech and recreation therapists work as a team to help patients reduce their dependency on others and achieve the highest level of functional independence,\rdblquote  says Frank Hyland, vice president of rehabilitation for Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network. \ldblquote Successful rehabilitation helps you get back to doing the things you love with the people you love.\rdblquote  \par
\par
The Physical Rehabilitation Process \par
Rehabilitation is a different experience for everyone, but care typically progresses in the following way:\par
\par
Acute or Physician Care: To Stabilize Your Condition - For serious injuries and medical conditions like stroke, brain injury or multiple traumas, inpatient rehabilitation care follows an acute-care hospital stay. For injuries like sprains, strains and fractures, a visit to a physician will be the first line of care.\par
Inpatient Rehabilitation: To Regain Function and Independence - Patients typically receive at least three hours of physical, occupational, speech or recreational therapy each day at a rehabilitation facility such as Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Hospital-Allentown. A multidisciplinary team of physicians, therapists and nurses develop and oversee a treatment plan to meet individual goals.\par
Outpatient Rehab: To Maintain and Improve Function - Patients who are discharged from inpatient rehabilitation will continue therapy in an outpatient facility, such as Good Shepherd Physical Therapy. Patients with less serious conditions may be referred right to an outpatient facility for treatment. Maintaining function on an ongoing basis may include joining a medical-model fitness center, fitness class or support group.\par
\par
Common conditions we treat:\par
\par
Acute & chronic pain : \par
Pain is an unpleasant sensation in animals that is caused by actual or perceived injury to body tissues and produces physical and emotional reactions. \par
Neck & back pain\par
The most common cause of acute back or neck pain is a muscle injury, in which muscle fibers stretch too far and tear. Muscle injury may be caused by overuse, such as from heavy lifting, as well as by repetitive motions that put continual stress on the back or neck muscles.\par
Frozen Shoulder (Adhesive Capsulitis)\par
Adhesive capsulitis and frozen shoulder syndrome (FSS) are two terms that have been used to describe a painful and stiff shoulder. The current consensus definition of a frozen shoulder by the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons is "a condition of uncertain etiology characterized by significant restriction of both active and passive shoulder motion that occurs in the absence of a known intrinsic shoulder disorder."\par
Rotator Cuff Tendonitis\par
Rotator cuff tendinitis, or tendonitis, affects the tendons and muscles that help move your shoulder joint. If you have tendinitis, it means that your tendons are inflamed or irritated. Rotator cuff tendinitis is also called impingement syndrome.\par
Impingement syndrome\par
impingement syndrome is a common cause of shoulder pain. It occurs when there is impingement of tendons or bursa in the shoulder from bones of the shoulder. \par
Superior Labral Tears\par
A SLAP tear is a torn piece of cartilage in the inner portion of the shoulder joint. It can be painful and/or limit movement in the shoulder, especially overhead motions.\par
AC Joint Injuries\par
An acromioclavicular (AC) joint injury is commonly referred to as "shoulder separation" and should not be confused with a shoulder dislocation. \par
Tennis or golfers elbow\par
You don\rquote t have to be Roger Federer or Phil Mickelson to have it. Even if you\rquote ve never played a set of tennis or a round of golf, you can still suffer from these elbow injuries. Tennis Elbow and Golfer\rquote s Elbow are both overuse injuries that are caused by any activity that requires repetitive motion of the arm and wrist. The difference between the two conditions lies in where the elbow is inflamed.\par
Post UCL re-construction\par
Injuries to the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) in throwing athletes frequently occurs from the repetitive valgus loading of the elbow during the throwing motion, which often results in surgical reconstruction of the UCL requiring a structured postoperative rehabilitation program. \par
Post Total Elbow Arthroplasty\par
Total elbow arthroplasty has continued to evolve over time. Elbow implants may be linked or unlinked. Unlinked implants are attractive for patients with relatively well preserved bone stock and ligaments, but many favor linked implants, since they prevent instability and allow replacement for a wider spectrum of indications.\par
Pronator Teres Syndrome\par
Pronator teres syndrome is a compression neuropathy of the median nerve at the elbow. It is rare compared to compression at the wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome) or isolated injury of the anterior interosseous branch of the median nerve (anterior interosseous syndrome).\par
Post Total Hip and Knee Replacements\par
The prostheses for a total hip replacement (total hip arthroplasty) can be inserted into the pelvis and femur with or without cement. The options are customized for each patient by the orthopedic surgeon.\par
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome\par
Patellofemoral pain syndrome is a broad term used to describe pain in the front of the knee and around the patella, or kneecap. It is sometimes called "runner's knee" or "jumper's knee" because it is common in people who participate in sports\emdash particularly females and young adults\emdash but patellofemoral pain syndrome can occur in nonathletes, as well. \par
Post Patellar Tendor & Quad Tendon Repair\par
When the quadriceps tendon ruptures, the patella loses its anchoring support in the thigh. Without this anchoring effect of the intact quadriceps tendon, the patella tends to move inferiorly (towards the foot).\par
Patellar Tendonitis\par
Patellar tendinopathy (or as it is commonly known patellar tendonitis or tendinitis) is an overuse injury affecting your knee. It is the result of your patella tendon being overstressed. A common name for it is Jumper's Knee.\par
Post ACL re-construction\par
You had surgery to repair a damaged ligament in your knee called the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). This article tells you how to care for yourself when you go home from the hospital.\par
Hip bursitis\par
Bursae, are small, jelly-like sacs that are located throughout the body, including around the shoulder, elbow, hip, knee, and heel. They contain a small amount of fluid, and are positioned between bones and soft tissues, acting as cushions to help reduce friction.\par
Herniated/Bulging Disk\par
Disks act as cushions between the vertebrae in your spine. They're composed of an outer layer of tough cartilage that surrounds softer cartilage in the center. It may help to think of them as miniature jelly doughnuts, exactly the right size to fit between your vertebrae.\par
Sciatica\par
The sciatic nerve begins from nerve roots in the spinal cord in the low back and extends through the buttock area to send nerve endings down the lower limb.\par
Planter Fasciitis\par
Plantar fasciitis (PLAN-tur fas-e-I-tis) is one of the most common causes of heel pain. It involves inflammation of a thick band of tissue that runs across the bottom of your foot and connects your heel bone to your toes (plantar fascia).\par
Achilles Tendonitis\par
Achilles tendinitis is a common condition that occurs when the large tendon that runs down the back of your lower leg becomes irritated and inflamed. \par
Peroneal Tendonitis\par
Peroneal tendonitis is inflammation of the peroneal tendons which run behind the lateral malleolus or the bony bit on the outside of the ankle causing and swelling on the outer ankle.\par
Ankle sprain\par
An ankle sprain is an injury to the tough bands of tissue (ligaments) that surround and connect the bones of the leg to the foot. The injury typically happens when you accidentally twist or turn your ankle in an awkward way. This can stretch or tear the ligaments that hold your ankle bones and joints together.\par
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome\par
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a common condition that causes pain, numbness, and tingling in the hand and arm. The condition occurs when one of the major nerves to the hand \emdash  the median nerve \emdash  is squeezed or compressed as it travels through the wrist. \par
Post-surgical rehab\par
Post surgery, one needs to go through various exercises to optimize results and come back to their best self. Doctor prescribes easy exercises to the patient to minimize complications like chest infection and early strengthening or variations of motion exercises.\par
Weight management\par
Whether your weight-loss goals involve trying to lose 5 pounds or more than 50, the same principles determine how much weight you lose and how fast your weight loss will occur.\par
Sports injury\par
Player getting ankle taped at an American football game in Mexico A tennis injury Tackles like this one in women's Australian rules football can cause injuries. Ryan Miller of the Buffalo Sabres suffers an ankle sprain. Sports injuries are injuries that occur in athletic activities or exercising. In the United States there are about 30 million teenagers and children alone that participate in some form of organized sport. About 3 million avid sports competitors 14 years of age and under experience sports injuries annually, which causes some loss of time of participation in the sport. The leading cause of death involving sports-related injuries, although rare, is brain injuries.\par
Spinal & joint dysfunction\par
Sacroiliac joint dysfunction is improper movement of the joints at the bottom of the spine that connect the sacrum to the pelvis. It can result in pain in the low back and legs, or inflammation of the joints known as sacroiliitis.\par
Balance Training\par
Balance training involves doing exercises that strengthen the muscles that help keep you upright, including your legs and core. These kinds of exercises can improve stability and help prevent falls.\par
Headaches & dizziness\par
Dizziness that accompanies a headache could be a sign of a migraine, but it can also be related to others factors. Find out how a doctor can help determine a proper diagnosis, and explore treatment options.\par
General de-conditioning\par
Deconditioning is a complex process of physiological change following a period of inactivity, bedrest or sedentary lifestyle. It results in functional losses in such areas as mental status, degree of continence and ability to accomplish activities of daily living. It is frequently associated with hospitalization in the elderly. \par
\par
\par
}
 